# 8. primitives vs objects

> review: primitives, objects and the js engine

#### primitives

> number
> string
> boolean
> undefined
> null
> symbol
> BigInt

#### objects

> object literal
> arrays
> function
> many more...

when we're talking about memory and memory management, we refer to primitives > primitives types and objetcs > reference types, because of the different way in which they are stored in memory

#### javascript engine

the engine has two components > the call stack, where functions are executed and the heap, where objects are stored in memory.

> all of our objects - or reference types - will get stored in the memory heap
> on the other hand, primitives - or primitive tyoes - are stored in the call stack, which means that primitives types are stored in the execution contexts in which they are declared.

### primitive vs reference values

> CHECK PRIMITIVE VS REFERENCE.JPG

#### primitive values example:

    let age = 30;
    let oldAge = age;
    age = 31;
    console.log(age); //31
    console.log(oldAge); //30

what happens inside the js engine and the computer's memory?

when we declare a variable like 'age = 30', first, js will create a so-called unique identifier with the variable name:

    Identifier

    age

and then, a piece of memory will be allocated with a certain address, for example:

    Address

    0001

and finally, the value will be stored in memory at the specified address:

    Value

    30

so, in this case, the value 30 will be specified at memory address 0001. this all happens in a CALL STACK, where primitives values are stored.

> the identificer actually points to the address, not to the value itself!
> so, we would say that the 'age' variable is equal to 30, but in fact, 'age' is equal to the memory address 0001 - which holds the value of 30! this subtle distinction is very important to keep in mind.

in the next line, we declared 'oldAge' to be equal to 'age', so knowing that a variable actually holds a memory address, 'oldAge' will point to the same memory address as 'age' (0001), so it will look like 'oldAge' is 30 too!

now, in the next line, we set 'age' to 31. the address 0001 will NOT became 31 (and that would change 'oldAge' as well since they both point to the same address).

> the value at a certain memory address is immutable, so it cannot be changed (from 30 to 31).
> instead, a new piece of memory is allocated, and the age identifier now points to the new address, which is holding the new value of 31:

    Address        Value

    0001            31

and thats why, when we log the both variales to the console in the end, they both return the values expected: 'age === 31' and 'oldAge === 30'.

now, with reference values, things work a bit diffently:

#### reference values example:

    const me = {
    name: 'Jonas',
    age: 30,
    };

    const friend = me;
    friend.age = 27;

    console.log('Friend:', friend); //{name: 'Jonas', age: 27}
    console.log('Me:', me); //{name: 'Jonas', age: 27}

when a new object is created - such as the 'me' object, it is stored in the heap. and such as before, there s a memory address and then the value itself:

    Address                Value

    D30F                 {
                            name: 'Jonas';
                         age: 30;
                        }

in the case of reference values like this 'me' object, the 'me' identifier does actually NOT point directly to this new created memory address in the heap - in this example, 'D30F'. instead, it will point to a new piece of memory thats created in the stack:

    Identifier         Address           Value

    age                0001               30
    oldAge             0002               31
    me                 0003               D30F

and then this new piece of memory will then point to the object that's in the heap by using the memory address as its value (D30F).

> the piece of memory in the call stack has a reference to the piece of memory in the heap which holds the 'me' object.

thats the reason why we call objects reference types.

> again, when we declare a variable as an object, an identifier is created, which points to a piece of memory in the stack, which in turn points to a piece of memory in the heap (where the object is actually stored).

it works this way because the objects might be too large to be stored in the stack, so they are stored in the heap which is like an almost unlimited memory pool. and the stack just keeps a reference to where the object is actually stored in the heap so it can find it whenever necessary.

moving on with the code, a new variable 'friend' is created, that is set equal to the 'me' object. just like primitive values, the friend identifier will point to the exat same memory address as the 'me' identifier (in this case, address 0003, that contains the reference which points to the object itself).

> at this point, the 'friend' object is now essentially the exact same as the 'me object.

but, we then changed a property in the 'friend' object, setting 'friend.age' to 27. so what happens is that the object is found in the heap and the 30 is changed to 27.

even though we defined friend variable as a const, we can still manipulate the object without problems, because we're not changing the value in memory from the 'friend' identifier, it is still 'D30F' (the reference to the object). all we did was change the value in the heap, and thats ok!

> it is misconception that all variables declared with const are immutable. that is only true for PRIMITIVE values!

the heap looks like this now:

    Address                Value

    D30F                 {
                            name: 'Jonas';
                         age: 27;
                        }

when logged to the console, the 'friend' variable now have the 'age' set to 27. but, when also logged, the 'me' object, the 'age' is ALSO 27, even though we never changed 'me.age' directly.

this happens because 'me' and 'friend' both point to the exact same object in the memory heap, and whenever the object changes, it will always reflect in 'friend' and 'me' objects.

> they are just two different identifiers pointing to the exact same value.
> and that value is the memory address D30F which points to the reference in the memory heap

whenever you think tat you're copying an object, you are really just creating a new variable that points to the exact same object. and that has huge implications for the way js works in practice.

### three more big topics about how js works behind the scenes to be learned later in the course

one fundamental concept of js is:

#### prototypal inheritance

object oriented programming (OOP) with js

#### event loop

asynchronous js: promises, async/await and ajax

#### how the DOM really works

advanced DOM and events
