# 5. variable environment hoisting and the TDZ.md

### how variables are actually created in js?

in js, we have a mecanism called hoisting.

    hoisting: makes some types of variable acessible/usable in the code before they are actually declared. "Variables lifted to the top of their scope"

> people say that hoisting makes the variables magically lift or move to the top of their scope (for ex, to the top of a function). that is actually what it looks like on the surface, but thats not what happens

##### behind the scenes:

before execution, the code is scanned for variable declarations; and for each variable, a new property is created in the variable environment object.

> this happens during the creatin phase of the execution context

then, for each variable that is found in the code, a new property is created in a variable environment object. and thats how hoisting really works.

> hoisting does not work the same for all variable types...

> CHECK HOISTING.JPG

#### function declarations

this means that we can use the function declaration before they are actually declared in the code, because they are stored in the variable environment object, even before the code starts executing.

> so, when the variable value is needed, they already have it to provide even if it was written later in the code.
> function declarations are only block scoped in STRICT MODE. otherwise, they are function scoped. but we never should use sloppy mode anyways.

#### var variables

they are hoisted, but in a different way. unlike functions, when we try to access a var variable before its declared in the code, we dont get the declared value, but "undefined". this behavior is a common source of bugs in js.

> this is one of the main reasons why we never use var.

#### let and const variables

they are NOT hoisted. technically they are, but not in practice. the returned value is <unitialized>, so there is no value to work with. and so, in practice is like hoisting is not happening at all.
instead, we say that these variables are placed in a so-called Temporal Dead Zone or TDZ, which makes it so that we cant access the variables between the beginning of the scope and to the place where the variables are declared.

> bascally: cant use the variable before its declared, or else we get an error.
> blocked scoped, so they exist only in the block where they were created!!

#### functions expressions and arrows

the hoisting in those functions depends if they were created ysing var or let/const. this means that a function expression or arrow function created with var is hoisted to undefined. but, if created with let or const, its not usable before its declared in a code because of the TDZ. just like normal variables.

> thats why we cannot use function expressions before we write them in the code unlike function declarations

### Temporal Dead Zone, let and const

imagine the following code:

    const myName = 'Jonas';

    if (my name === 'Jonas') {
        console.log(`Jonas is a ${job}`);
        const age = 2037 - 1989;
        console.log(age);
        const job = 'teacher';
        console.log(x);
    }

the variable job is a const, therefore it can be only used after it was declared, because it is NOT hoisted. that said, when we try to log that first string (`Jonas is a ${job}`;), it wont work, because job hasnt been defined yet. The first three lines of code inside the if block (the console.log, the age variable and the second console.log) are all in the Temporal Dead Zone for the job variable.

> its like the job variable didnt exist

The return message is:

> "ReferenceError: Cannot access 'job' before initialization"

But... if we try to access a variable that was never created (like the "x"), the error message is different, saying:

> "ReferenceError; x is not defined"

That is because, the engine already read all the code before and already know that the job variable will be eventually initialized, because it has already set the variable into the variable environment to unitialized.
So, when the execution reaches the line where the variable is declared, it is removed from the TDZ and its safe to use.

> Each and every let and const variable get their own TDZ that starts at the beggining of the scope until the line where it is defined. And the variable is only safe to use after the TDZ.

#### why TDZ?

the main reason why the tdz was introduced in ES6 is that the behavior described makes it way easier to avoid and catch errors. because, using a variable that is set to undefined before its actually declared can cause serious bugs. it is bad practice and should be avoided.

> the best way to avoid it is to simply get an error when we attempt to do so!

a second reason is to make const variables work the way they are supposed to, making it impossible to set them to undefined first and then set them to their real value later. const should never be reassigned. it should only be assigned when the execution reaches the declaration. that makes it impossible to use the variable before.

#### if hoisting creates so many problems, why hoisting?

one of the main reasons is that so we can use functions before actual declaration. some people think this makes the code a lot more readable.

> the only reason it works with var too its that it was the only way hoisting could be implemented at the time. var hoisting is just a byproduct of hoisting functions.
