# 6. this keyword.md

## this keyword/variable:

is a special variable that is created of every execution context (every function). takes the value of (points of) the "owner" of the function in which the this keyword is used.

> its one of the three components of any execution contexts, along with the variable environment and the scope chain.

the this keyword is NOT static. it depends on how the function is called, and its value is only assigned when the function is actually called.

if we say:

    x = 5;

then x will always be 5, but the this keyword depends on the way in which the function was called

### the 4 ways a function can be called

#### 1. method

    this = <object that is calling the method>

it points to the object that is calling the method.

    const jonas = {
        name: 'Jonas';
        year: 1989,
        calcAge: function () {
            return 2037 - this.year;
        }
    };
    jonas.calcAge();

> the result was 48

the method is the calcAge method, because is a function attached to the 'jonas' object. in the last line, we called the method and inside the method the this keyword was used. the value of this this keyword will be jonas, because that is the object that is calling the method.
and, in jonas, we can access all the properties that it has and the this.year will became 1989, because thats jonas.year

> in this case, writing jonas.year would have the exact same effect

#### 2. simple function call

    this = undefined

simply calling them as normal functions, not as method so not attached to any object. this is only valid for strict mode.

> otherwise, this will point to the global object which in case of the browser, is the window object

remember to always use strict mode!

#### 3. arrow function

    this = <this of surrounding function (lexical this)>

while its not exactly a way of calling functions, its an important kind of function that we need to consider. because arrow functions do NOT get the this.keyword. if we use the this variable in an arrow function, it will simply be the this keyword of the surrounding function (of the parent function).

> in technical terms, this is called the lexical this keyword.

#### 4. event listener

    this = <DOM element that the handler is attached to>

//

this keyword does NOT point to the function in which we are using itself, and also NOT the variable environment of the funciton.

there are other ways in which we can call a function, for exemple:

#### others: new, call, apply, bind:

    <to be learned later in the course...>
